HANDS-ON: EXPLORE RESEARCH DATA WITH AN AI HARNESS

SET UP
Create a folder named m3gim-explorer. Download the CSV into it:
https://chpollin.github.io/summer-school-musicology-2026/downloads/m3gim-mobility-evidence.csv
Open this folder in an AI harness with file access and a terminal.
Python is needed for the inspection and the preview commands below.
Keep these instructions open beside the harness. Start with the CSV alone;
no data.md, research.md or prepared website is required.

PROMPT 1: INSPECT THE DATA

Inspect m3gim-mobility-evidence.csv in this folder.
Run Python to examine the columns, count rows and unique evidence_id and
document_id values, inspect missing values and check the date range and format.
Show the code you executed and its actual output.

Explain what one row represents and which places and recorded roles occur.
The date column contains different kinds of dates. Use recorded_role,
source_statement, cataloguing_note and context_note to explain their meaning
and uncertainty. Distinguish document creation from events and proposed events.
Explain any place-name normalisation while preserving the original values.
Keep the CSV unchanged. Do not create a website yet.

PAUSE AND INSPECT
Which files did the agent read? Which commands actually ran?
Check one statement and its date interpretation against the original CSV.

PROMPT 2: BUILD A SIMPLE WEBSITE

Using the CSV you inspected, build a simple static website with plain HTML,
CSS and JavaScript. Create index.html, style.css and script.js.
Use one interactive timeline, grouped by place, with a legend and detail panel.
Distinguish recorded_role values. These describe the place/date relationship;
do not confuse them with operatic roles or malaniuk_recorded_role.

Use every CSV record. Keep overlapping points individually selectable without
changing their dates. On selection, show evidence_id, document_id, the original
date and place, recorded_role, source_statement, all notes and source links.
Preserve all source IDs. Explain the date basis in the interface and distinguish
document dates from event dates. Mark uncertainty from the notes even when the
date looks exact. Keep records without usable dates accessible if any occur.
Attendance and travel routes remain unconfirmed. Do not infer gender from names.

Keep the design simple and readable, with keyboard-selectable records and text
labels as well as colour. No framework, build step or external services.
Keep the CSV unchanged. If you generate JSON for browser loading, derive it from
this CSV and preserve every record and its source IDs. Do not invent data.

Start a local preview if possible. Give me its URL and explain how to start and
stop it myself. Report which checks you executed and which need my inspection.

OPEN THE WEBSITE LOCALLY
Open a terminal in m3gim-explorer, where index.html is located.
With Python installed, run one of these commands:

Windows:
py -m http.server 8000 --bind 127.0.0.1
If py is unavailable but python is installed, use:
python -m http.server 8000 --bind 127.0.0.1

macOS / Linux:
python3 -m http.server 8000 --bind 127.0.0.1

Open http://localhost:8000 in your browser. Keep the terminal open.
Press Ctrl+C in that terminal to stop the server. If port 8000 is already in use,
choose 8001 in both the command and the browser URL.
Use the local server rather than double-clicking index.html so the browser can
load the data files. If Python is missing, ask the instructor for setup help.

CHECK AND REVISE
Select a record and compare its date, source IDs and notes with the CSV.
Try overlapping points and a record with uncertain dating.
If you find a discrepancy, give the agent concrete feedback:
"Selecting this record shows [...], but the CSV records [...]. Fix the
discrepancy and explain how you checked it."
Do not invent a defect if the checked behaviour is correct.

SOURCE AND EVIDENCE LIMITS
This is the same teaching sample used in Session 2, not a representative sample.
Date syntax alone does not establish historical certainty. Facsimile verification
is separate from checking the website against the CSV.
Source description and attribution:
https://chpollin.github.io/summer-school-musicology-2026/downloads/m3gim-mobility-evidence-source.txt
Digital Humanities Craft / M3GIM, Universitaetsarchiv KUG. CC BY 4.0.
